--- 
layout: default
title: Collaboratively Understanding Biology Education
---
* TOC
{:toc}
## {{ page.title }}

![CUBE Logo](https://metastudio.org/uploads/default/original/2X/2/2612883b207547b399ce35d634727c38c4793f0d.png)

CUBE: Collaboratively Understanding Biology Education, is currently,
in the 8th year of operation, this project expanded in its scale and
continued to encourage and inspire us.  As a demonstration of the
pedagogical principles designed as a part of the gnowledge lab, CUBE
initiative stands out as one of our major integrated initiatives, that
has multiple implications to STEM education in the country.

![CUBE participants](https://stemgames.metastudio.org/uploads/default/optimized/2X/f/f1ca6b78917f085c44c4d4d1b97ad490cc3db4c3_2_608x500.png)


## History of CUBE

The CUBE project started as a 5-week hands-on research experience
based on ‘Simple Model Systems’ like daphnia, Drosophila, snails, in
the summer of 2012. The first phase saw the participation of only 18
students from 4 different colleges in Mumbai. Working on these simple
model systems, the participants engaged in some frontline questions
regarding the molecular basis of learning and memory, epigenetics,
regeneration, decision-making, biological rhythms, etc. What happened
next is more unconventional as this model of undergraduate research
proved to be beyond 'apprenticeship model' wherein students are
trained in a one-time workshop. It showed cascade effect as more and
more colleges continued to be roped in as participating colleges and
required them to establish 'simple model systems' based research labs
in their colleges and initiate neighborhood colleges into already
expanding CUB research program.  These student-centered frugal
research labs showed open-ended, interactive, inquiry-driven,
collaborative and context-bound biology research undertaken by these
students. The model systems and the techniques introduced in these
labs are incredibly inexpensive and yet raise sophisticated questions
and initiated students into the broader scientific practice wherein
they engaged in frontline questions through these simple model
systems.
 
For any such collaborative learning environment to sustain, the
importance of change agents, which are teachers in our cases, cannot
be undermined. Hence, it is pertinent that the gap between the
teachers and researchers be bridged by linking the two in ways that
bring processes of research into teaching and also help teachers build
their research profile. We tried to do this through various
teacher-training interventions.  CUBE model of learning is thus built
on 'communities of practice' model where teachers, researchers, and
students are socialized into the practice of research communities
through active and sustained engagement and collaboration.

Besides face to face interactions in CUBE labs, our virtual platforms
like social networking apps and our platform provide a networked
learning environment which enables learners to get entry into a common
database that can be browsed, retrieved, linked and commented on by
users for information on various model systems. Simultaneously, the
learners provide and receive process-related feedback which
effectively guides the continued revision and restructuring of
knowledge.
 
The result of all these painstaking efforts has been extremely
rewarding. Besides students learning in these labs and opening such
labs in their colleges, for instance, BehaviorWatch and Drosophila
were included as a model system in Mumbai University Zoology practical
syllabus. Likewise, Delhi University awarded the taxonomic profiling
of motor actions of birds as an innovation project by supporting ten
undergraduate students as a part of the CUBE.

## The CUBE Design rationale

The rapidly advancing frontiers of biology research and the changing
nature of biology resulting from it, have called for some serious
action to be taken to transform the nature of biology education. The
undergraduates need to be prepared for the challenges posed by the
changing ways we think about and engage in biological research, while
opportunities for investigating questions, which otherwise could never
be addressed, are becoming possible due to emerging
technologies. There is a strong need first to accept and subsequently
ensure that the biology we teach authentically reflects the biology we
do. The 21st-century biology undergraduate needs to engage in
authentic biology research and integrate the research experiences and
skills acquired into understanding, solving and making informed
decisions on complex problems related to biology and those encountered
in their daily lives.

The 21st-century biology requires that undergraduates learn to
integrate concepts across levels of organization and complexity and
that they synthesize and analyze information that connects conceptual
domains. Teachers, educators, researchers, and curriculum planners
need to view teaching from an approach that captures the spirit of the
nature of scientific practice and to look for concepts that
communicate to each other because it would make more sense to
communicate the generalities and encourage students to discover their
applications through well-designed laboratory exercises.

The challenge, however, is to keep the undergraduate classroom current
and dynamic without making it overwhelming; to excite undergraduates
with the modern, cutting-edge discoveries and at the same time finding
the right balance between the depth of coverage required for
conceptual understanding and the factual knowledge needed for the
same. This may need a restructuring of the current undergraduate
biology syllabus in many ways. One of the productive ways to strike
this balance is to revamp the undergraduate biology by integrating
research with teaching; making undergraduate research a meaning-making
experience.

To inspire and further solidify the interest of undergraduate biology
students in making career choices in biology they should be given an
opportunity to experience the allure of the research
scholarship. Their participation in such pursuit will improve not only
their ability to understand how biologists conduct research but will
also prepare them to evaluate scientific claims in their day-to-day
lives. This rightly falls under the mandate of “The Vision and Change:
Call for Action” report, which discusses the need to develop
biological literacy to prepare the coming generation of biology
scientists, educators, and informed citizens.

Hands-on research cultivates scientific thinking, giving students
authentic research experiences including designing experiments,
interpreting unexpected outcomes, coping with experimental failures,
considering alternative methodology, testing new techniques and many
more. These experiences go beyond the apprenticeship model, and such
outcomes can never be expected to be a part of a regular college
laboratory.

The undergraduate biology research environment thus forms a rich
learning ecology with student-centric features. The typical features
of such an ecology are that it is open-ended, interactive,
inquiry-driven, cooperative, collaborative, and context-bound. Without
any doubt, the research experience will have high levels of
student-student and student-faculty interactions, ready connections of
the subject matter to topics of student interest and relevance,
learning that reflects aspects of scientific inquiry and most
importantly learning progressions designed from the efforts of an
ongoing students feedback to the teacher as well as their peers.  The
features of such an ecology mimic those of the actual scientific
practices and show developmental progressions in students
understanding close to that of the scientists in a typical research
laboratory setup.

Linking teaching and research will help to bring the processes of
research into teaching and can support students in the development of
a variety of specific as well as general skills. It can also benefit
institutions to build a research profile and thus encourage networking
with other institutions and research groups. Further, a community of
biology educators/researchers will be built, who are willing to
integrate evidence-based practice into their teaching. Platforms like
an online portal will provide an overview of the pedagogic practices
and the reasons for adopting a particular practice.

It is critical that the mutually synergistic communities of biology
teachers/educators and biology researchers work together to meet the
common goal of student-centered learning.  We have been using these
principles in other projects like Connected Learning Initiative
(ClIxx), makerSpace and STEMGames.

## Open Issues 

Several open issues have emerged from our 6-year long engagement with
students in our CUBE research programs. For instance, analyzing and
examining: 
- role of connected learning environments, using new media, instant
  messaging in learning and knowledge generation in a group of
  students
- the strength of the weak links in causing, propagating and
  maintaining networks of participants students engagement with
  inscriptions, pictures, graphs in communication in lab and causeries
  or formal meetings held in CUBE lab
- role of multi-graded classroom/laboratory in bringing dynamism in
  research fostering learning environment like CUBE
- Students' misconceptions regarding sciences, ways of doing science,
  especially biology
- group dynamics that give rise to learning in a group of participants
- negligible participation of teachers in the program

## Projects

Here are the projects - [STEM Investigation Projects - CUBE](https://www.gnowledge.org/projects/resources-cube.html)
