--- 
layout: default
title: Research Projects
description: of gnowledge lab of HBCSE, TIFR
---
* Generate Table of Contents
{:toc} 

# Concept Mapping

(Meena Kharatmal and Nagarjuna)

Re-representation of knowledge in non-linear network forms such as
concept mapping are known to help in meaningful learning. We refined
this technique to help students develop rigour over-and-above
meaningful learning, called Refined Concept Mapping. This technique
focuses more on the predicate space of knowledge representation, which
is necessary because models used in science deal with variable
properties and relations between them rather than simple linkages
between objects. The technique was developed through field studies
involving teachers and students. The work is published in
international concept mapping and computer science forums with focus
on education. [Read a full report on this project](/projects/conceptmapping.html)

# Critical Graphicacy

(Amit Dakulkar and Nagarjuna)

Graphs form an important component of visualizing, analyzing, model
building and interpreting data in science. Similarly in mathematics,
graphs are another mode of representing mathematics, which also help
in analyzing and representing functions.  An analysis of school
science textbooks showed that reading, constructing and making graphs,
called as 'graphicacy', is not sufficiently addressed.  Also students
find it difficult to understand the relationship between the graphs
and the phenomena they represent.  Our research shows this
important skill of reading, constructing and interpreting graphs is
given almost no priority in school textbooks. Students have very few
opportunities to engage with this rich topic which spans across
disciplines. The connections between science and mathematics by means
of graphs is missing.

To address the "poverty of graphicacy" we designed activities which
engaged students in topics which span different concepts, and
subjects. Constructionist learning was the context in which these
activities were carried out. The design principles of these activities
included ideas from the constructionism framework of Seymour Papert,
studio based education, use of real world data where possible, and
making the relation between concrete phenomena and their abstract
representations explicit. The activities spanned a wide range of
concepts and skills, such as indirect measurement, scale, statistics,
experimental design and data collection, plotting, modeling,
predicting, extrapolation, visualization, multiple representations,
analysis etc. in order to aid learners to collect data from the real
world, dataloggers (such as expEYES kit) were used. GeoGebra, a free
dynamic mathematics application, helped in this visualization and
interpretation of the collected data. 

A very innovative use of GeoGebra was to use representations of
scientific models to study the history of science. A set of four
models were developed to visualize and explore the implications of
geocentric and heliocentric models from the history of astronomy.

# Social Cognition

**Construction of Scientific Knowledge in a Collaborative Sharing and Seeking environment, (Shraddha Gumre and Nagarjuna)**


The research begun as a part of the CUBE project, it is an ongoing
research study on how a group of students while maintaining simple
model systems to study behavioral plasticity develop the cognitive
skills required for conducting scientific research. The program used
minimal equipment to demonstrate how project based science education
can be done. The students learn science process skills: asking
questions, testing hypotheses, designing experiments through a
sustained online and offline conversations. As a part of this ongoing
program, we are conducting a research study to understand how students
develop quantitative model based reasoning while conducting their
experimental projects.  Although science is a social, collaborative
inquiry, typical classroom and science laboratory settings are
designed to judge learning outcomes individually.  The ongoing studies
demonstrate that students learn the process of doing science when they
work in a collaborative, networked manner, with a heterogeneous mix of
students of different cognitive levels and age groups.  Such a social
space was created both online and offline during the Collaboratively
Understanding Biology Education (CUBE) program. It enhanced
opportunities to create inscriptions, pose questions, identify
variables, test hypotheses, design experiments, read published
literature etc. This ongoing research study is informed and influenced
by socially situated cognitive framework.


# Shared Memory Space

**Instant Messaging as a constructionist social learning context (Rafikh Shaikh and Nagarjuna)**

A collaborative framework was also found to be effective for primary
school children in Rafikh's study.  In this study instant messaging
(chatting) through networked computers (using OLPC) was used to
facilitate numeracy and literacy skills.  The study demonstrated the
effective use of externalized shared memory in a collaborative and
competitive (game like) setting promoting accelerated learning as well
as building motivation. Using a very similar research framework as
that which was adopted for Shraddha, we began to study primary school
children's mathematics learning in a constructionist social learning
environment.  In this ongoing study we used an instant messaging
(chat) application designed on wireless-networked computers in a rural
school (Khairat) for facilitating both numeracy and literacy
skills. The chatting game turned out to be a highly engaging and
popular activity among the primary school students. This research
applies a situated cognitive constructionist framework to design and
deploy studio based learning contexts in science education. 

The gnowledge lab took a pioneering role in supporting the pilot
implementations of the One Laptop Per Child (OLPC) project in Goa and
Khairat village in Raigad district.  This is being done in
collaboration with Digital Bridge Foundation.  Khairat is the first
OLPC implementation in India.  OLPC and the Sugar Learning Platform
(SLP) is explicitly designed on the basis of the studio based
contructionist philosophy of Symour Papert by his colleagues at MIT.
SLP is produced by geeks, with several contributions from the learning
students who became makers themselves, at http://sugarlabs.org/.
Walter Bender a leading hacker of the SLP who visited gnowledge lab in 2012.
The bottomline of this project is: learning and making can
happen together.  Gnowledge lab intends to transform this machine so
as to rewrite the bottomline into: Learning, making and investigation
can happen together in a studio environment.

# Understanding Evolution

**Understanding Causality in Natural Selection (Dr. Abhijeet Bardapurkar and Nagarjuna)**

Abhijeet Bardapurkar's thesis “Understanding causality in natural
selection: Towards the problematic of learning Darwin's theory of
evolution” is an attempt to diagnose the cause of the problem of
teaching and learning the theory of evolution.  The empirical results
of Abhijeet's thesis demonstrate that most students do not understand
the theory.  But, students do not know that they do not
understand. Even the better performing students misunderstood the
theory.  Most teachers do not know that the student's have
misconceptions and they are least aware that they also have
misconceptions.  We painstakingly conducted the conceptual analysis
and did identify some of the major causes.  Careful analysis of the
various distinctions the teacher and the student must make in order to
teach and learn the theory of evolution were identified and explained
with examples and elaboration.  For example we distinguished between
the cause of variation from the consequence of variation, individual
change from heritable change; individual change from evolutionary
change and their respective causes; change by transformative action
from accumulation; nature's selection from natural selection; genesis
of functional structure from existence of a functional structure;
etc.


# Knowledge Network as a Complex System

(Arnab Kumar Ray, Rajiv Nair and Nagarjuna)

Based on the idea that a dependency relation (a quasi-causal
relationship) between learning objectives produces a complex
non-linear semantic network, a collaborative portal for building
dependency networks leading to teaching-learning sequences was
built. The same idea was extended to dependency relations between
software components and modeled the emerging knowledge network as a
complex system.

# The Roots of beingHuman

(Nagarjuna, Durgaprasad Karnam, Megha Sanyal)

**Grounding Syntax through Dexterous Halted-Action-Patterns in a Layered Sensory-Motor-Network**

Quite a few embodied mechanisms and cognitive architectures are being
developed and discussed (Merleau-Ponty 1945; Bateson 1972; Gibson
1978; Hutchins 1995; Brooks 1991; Karmiloff-Smith 1992; Clark 1997;
Thelen and Smith 1996; O’Regan, Noë 2001; Bongard and Pfiefer 2006;
Tani, 2015). These non-cognitivist models give valuable insights, by
integrating dynamical systems, neural networks, and distributed
processing models, about the roots of experience,
learning/memory. However, the semiotic aspects of cognition (Deacon
1997; Wheeler 2006; Corballis 2011) and a core feature of languages
such as generative syntax (Chomsky 1988), abstract symbolic
operations, and culture are weakly addressed by them. To address this
gap, we propose a model (as grounded philosophical speculation) that
generates syntax through dexterous Halted-Action-Patterns (HAPs)
embedded in a body characterized as layered sensory-motor-network
(SMN).
 
In this proposal, we integrate the following design principles into
the existing embodied models.  (a) The action patterns of the
sensory-motor network are layered.  (b) These layers are to be
distinguished from the ’layers’ of neural network in the sense that
these are based on a gradation of haltability of action-patterns at
multiple zones. (c) The physical and physiological (autopoietic)
action-patterns (beats e.g., heart-beat, motricity (Llinas 2001)) are
mandatory and non-haltable, forming the core-sustainable layers of the
SMN. (d) The haltable-action-patterns (HAPs in contrast to
Fixed-Action-Patterns) are pivoted on the core-layer to get
disengaged, while still being grounded in the network, making
cognitively differentiating actions and experiences possible (making
accessible what is available). (e) The HAPs are architectural bases of
dexterity. (f) Multiple action-zones within the SMN are related in an
agonistic and antagonistic manner to enable serial syntactic actions
(like gesturing, naming, nesting, recursion, reflexivity, etc
possible).
 
We discuss the implications of this architecture for furthering
cognitive semiotics and cognitive robotics.
